# Detecting Driver Drowsiness using Behavioral measures and Representation learning: A Deep Learning-based Technique

## Project Description
The inclining in road accidents is one of the most prevailing problems around the world. The growing number of vehicles on the road has paved a way for many inefficient and inattentive drivers. Several factors influence the road accidents such as drunken driving, speeding, avoiding safety gear like seat belts and helmets, distractions to drivers, non-adherence to lane driving, and driver drowsiness. The key to safe driving and prevention of accidents is predominantly dependent on the driver.  The lack of concentration or the driver’s drowsiness during driving is a major reason for road accidents. Preventing accidents by drowsiness need a technique to detect the factors that cause sleepiness in driver. 

Drowsiness or sleepiness is a biological state where the body is in transition from an awake state to a sleeping state in which the level of consciousness is reduced due to lack of sleep or fatigue, this causes the driver to fall into sleep quietly. During this stage, a driver is unable to take control over the vehicle with any actions such as braking timeously or head-on collisions and makes a sudden deviation from the road and makes a car over-turn and hit an obstacle due to loss of concentration and consciousness. 

According to statistics from the U. S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) out of 1,00,000 total accidents reported annually, 76,000 crashes happen due to drowsiness that led to death. In Australia, about 6% of accidents happen due to drowsiness in drivers among the total accidents. The UK reports approximately 20% of the accidents by fatigue. These statistics infers the importance of a drowsiness detection system is unavoidable and motivated to build a detection system as a precautionary measure to avoid road accidents. A common solution to the drowsiness detection problem is to develop a model that detects the sleepiness in drivers in an early stage to prevent accidents by considering several common signs and alert the driver if any of the signs are frequently detected. This project propose to develop a robust model to detect the sleepiness in driver by capturing behavior-based images such as yawning, eye blinking, and head-nodding states. 

